Has there been, over the years, a substantial
increase in students in the field of poultry
husbandry? And has there been a change in the
background of the students? By background, I
would have to say, let me preface that by saying a
geographical background. Have they come from
different areas of the world? Well, of course, I
inherited, when I took over the department, I
inherited no records.
And so it's not going to be easy for me to answer that
accurately. But in terms of numbers of students,
there has distinctly been an increase in numbers
of students, both undergraduate, but
particularly at the graduate level.
We have, since
about 1950,
we have probably had more graduate students in the
poetry department at Texas A&M University than
any other institution in the United States. I
don't think there's any challenge, even a
beginning challenge there. And so that the
increase in students has majorly been at the
graduate level.
Has this increase been primarily students from
the United States or from abroad? They've been
both, both. Yes, indeed, they've been both. Now
the undergraduate students, there's just been a
smattering of foreign undergraduate students.
They mostly take their undergraduate degrees at
home. and then come here for graduate work. So most
of the foreign students have been taking courses
at the graduate level. I believe earlier you were
telling me something about the reason why there
has been this tremendous increase in interest in
poultry
production around the world. And maybe you can
elaborate on that now. something about trying to
get more protein into the diet. Yes. Well, most of
the so-called developing nations, we have called
them by different names in the last 15 years, but
the common term now is developing nations. Most of
the developing nations have their protein source
in the first place they have been inadequate in the
amount of protein they have had available for
human consumption and then secondly the major
portion of that protein has been from plant
sources and most plant proteins other than soy
soybean meal or soy, almost all of the plant
proteins are deficient in lysine, which is one of
the required essential amino acids, required or
essential amino acids. It cannot be synthesized
by man himself. And another one is methionine, and
it cannot be synthesized by man, so it has to be
dietarily provided.
So, these two being low in most of the plant
proteins that these people had available to them
has meant that they have, in some cases, they have
actually not had taken full advantage, not been
able to take full advantage are the amount of
protein they had because of the limitations of
these two particular amino acids. See, they
couldn't take it from the diet. A human being can't
take the diet, the protein from the diet,
synthesize it into human protein. by any more than
the limiting, the amino acid that is the lowest,
the acquired amino acid that's the lowest. And so
for that reason, they have had, I figured a few
years ago when I was in Bangladesh, I figured at
that time that actually they were throwing away
are actually using for energy 17% of the protein
they consumed because they didn't have enough
lysine. And so since meat proteins or animal
proteins are quite high, or animal foods are quite
high in these two particular amino acids, these
developing countries have been anxious to
improve their dietary balance by introducing
some animal protein into their consumption now
many of them what animal protein they get is fish
But there's a limit to how much fish is available.
In some countries that are not close to the sea,
they can't even take advantage of fish as being one
of their animal proteins. And so as a result of it,
they have looked to methods of producing animal
protein and introducing it into their diet. Since
poultry is at the present time the most efficient
of the common domestic animals, it is the most
efficient converter of feed to food protein that
we have. And so as a result of it, they have looked to
poultry as being a way of supplementing their
human diet without robbing their feed supplies,
which some of them are capable of being used for
human food. And so that has created a national,
international interest in poultry. in poultry as
a supplier of animal protein for improving the
diets of these developing nations. In fact, I was
contacted about two weeks ago by one of the men who
had been called by the
administrator of Saudi Arabia. And they, as you
know, the last few years, most of those
Mid-Eastern countries have all the money they
want. Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, etc. They have,
because of the increase in oil prices, they have
all kinds of money. But agriculture-wise, they
are very deficient. But they do have the money to
buy from outside, if they can get it to buy. But most
of their people, their rulers, they do not want to
depend upon continuous importation of their
food. They want to develop their own agriculture
so that... They can be self-sufficient, or at
least more so in the future than they are at the
present time. And so they were looking into the
possibility of recruiting a team of American
scientists who could go over there and develop,
establish a poultry industry in the country. and
set it up so that it could continue to operate after
the scientists had finished their job. And this is
being done in New Orleans. Last week at the World's
Party Congress, I was contacted by the man who is in
charge of the agricultural development for Iraq.
and about the possibility of availability for
coming over for government consulting work in the
attempt to develop a poultry industry for their
country. I hope it develops. He'll find somebody
to do it. I don't know who it'll be, but he'll find it
because money is no—he actually spent nine
million dollars for equipment while he was in New
Orleans in the exhibit area of the World's
Congress last week. Money's not a problem. No, so
money's not a problem, right. Has the number of
foreign students from developing countries in
your graduate program had some influence on the
makeup of the coursework and the requirements for
a degree, let us say? No, I don't believe so,
because we have tended to have a pretty good
balance. This, of course, is maybe a prejudiced
opinion, but we think we have a very good balance
both between courses and of the subject matter
within a given course between the basic material,
which will work anywhere in the world, and applied
material, which can be used for application to the
specific problems of producing and feeding and
marketing poultry. And as a result, it has not been
necessary for us to do a great modification. Well,
I think earlier you indicated that
many of the students which you produce are really
kind of generalists rather than specialists. And
I was wondering if all of your students had been
from highly developed countries, if you possibly
would have developed more specialists and fewer
generalists. No, I think because of the trend we
have been going through. See, we have been, in the
United States, our units of production have been
getting bigger and fewer. And most of the board of
directors of an integrated operation want one man
who knows whether this special man, the manager of
the processing plant, is doing a good job or not. He
also wants to know, wants somebody who can tell him
or check for him whether this man that's running
the feed mill is doing a good job. And so for that
reason, domestically, the last 15 years, there's
been a much richer demand for these generalists
and management and production people than there
were before. And now we're at that stage where I
think we're going to start going back toward more
specialization. And the foreign countries, the
developing countries particularly, they can't
afford a geneticist, a nutritionist, and a market
technologist, and a physiologist in every one of
their operations. And so what they're trying to do
is to get a little shallower training, but get all
of these disciplines, a workable level of all of
these disciplines in one man, one or two men, you
see. And so for that reason, I think that explains
why there's been this number of students
in this area, in this generalized area. Okay.
Earlier you indicated that that during your first
teaching at A&M, you did some summer research with
vitamin deficiencies, perhaps in rats. Have you
continued the work with vitamin deficiencies
since then? I mean, did you switch over to
chickens, vitamin needs for chickens, later on
when you came back? Yes, yes indeed. All of my work
since I came back from away, while I was there and
since I have come back, all of my work has been with
poetry in one form or another. I've done no work
with other animals since then.
What would you say had been some of the more
important research that you had done
since 1946?
Well, this gives me an opportunity to brag an awful
lot. I hope you won't consider it to be too much so,
but it may sound that way. That's what I'm trying to
lay the foundation for. Please don't The others
have worked along the same lines and so on. And so
much of the work has been done by graduate students
and by other staff people and so on. And for that
reason, I will mention only those areas where I
think we have made at least some original
contribution to the area, that's all. And I
believe that one of these areas has been the
development of the idea that for laying hens, we
need to do, for optimum performance and for most
economical cost of that performance, that
so-called phase feeding is essential. Now, we've
always phase fed broilers. In other words, we
sometimes have a pre-starter, then a starter, and
then a finisher diet. But at least if we don't have a
pre-starter, we have a starter and a finisher. Now
that's only eight weeks. We market our broilers
usually at eight weeks, plus or minus a few days.
And so this has been accepted. But the tendency up
until a few years ago, the tendency was to
establish one ration for laying hens and feed this
same ration until the hens had finished their
production period and were discarded. Actually,
in the winter months we need more energy to keep
their body temperature up and in the summertime we
need to reduce the energy because the body
temperature is The environmental temperature,
they lose no heat to the environment, you see. So
that's what I mean by this phase feeding, just one
element. There's many elements of it. But we need
to change the ratio of protein to energy, for
example, according to the season. Wintertime, we
have more energy, less protein. In the summer,
we'll have the same daily consumption. But the
ratio is what I'm talking about here. Protein,
perhaps, is needed in both seasons. But the ratio
of energy to protein is higher in the wintertime
and lower in the summer. And the same thing is true
of calcium, the feed consumption. Our data, we fed
birds individually, and we find that in the
summertime they may eat only 90 to 95 grams of feed.
Whereas in the wintertime, the feed consumption,
the same diet, may go up to 115, 120 grams. Well now,
if you're only going to get 90 grams, and the bird's
laying at the same rate and she's consuming 115
grams, naturally there's got to be some changes
not just in energy and protein but there's also got
to be some changes in calcium because they've got
to lay down shells around those eggs and there's
got to be a change in vitamin level because you've
got to get enough vitamin out of 90 grams And over
here, if you put enough in 90 grams and you put the
same level in 115 grams, you're wasting a lot of it
down there. So in order for economy, we've simply
got to go to this so-called phase feeding. Now,
another area where we entered about five years
ago, we find that we can do more economical feeding
if we control the feed intake. That birds will
tend, laying birds will tend to overconsume,
consume more than they need to. And gain a little
extra body weight. Well, the more body weight they
gain, the more the maintenance requirement to
maintain that body, see? So if we can keep their
body weight down a little bit, we actually make
more, the cost of feed makes up about two-thirds of
the total cost of producing eggs. So we can do that.
We had a paper that was reported in New Orleans at
the World Congress last week. it attracted a lot of
attention. They took up the time for two papers to
ask questions in this area. There were some other
papers from other countries in the same area. So we
think perhaps here is another area in which we have
also made some contribution to this. I hadn't had a
chance to think about...
Could
you stop the...
Another area in which we have worked fairly
extensively here, and we should do it because we
produce a tremendous amount of grain sorghum in
this state, and so we have done a lot of feeding of
grain sorghum to poultry, particularly layers.
Most of my research program has been with layers.
And so we have fed different varieties, different
colors, that is yellow versus red, and the bird
resistant, we've tested the bird resistant, the
so-called bird resistant Milo, whether it
actually reduces performance of layers and so on
or not. I don't know that you've seen it, but there
was about two or three years ago, there was a book
published on the production and utilization of
grain sorghums. And Dr. Tanksley at Animal
Science and I were asked to write a chapter on the
feeding of grain sorghums to swine, to poultry,
and to swine, or to swine and poultry. And so there
is a... as a result of the published material on
grain sorghum feeding, there is this, and there
are reprints available on this chapter that we
have. Now, we tried a few years ago, I'm going to
mention this, although it resulted in no
practical application, a few years ago, I was very
much interested in... how we could improve the
survival of the poultry embryo from day old, from
the time of setting of the egg, to 21 days when they
hatch. And so we developed a plastic shell. It's in
two pieces, and it's clear and has a snap on cover.
And so we got a mold made and had these made for us by
one of the companies in Fort Worth, plastic
companies. And we tried to use this, we put the
shell, take the egg out of the shell and put it into
this plastic shell and then put it in the incubator
to try to make it develop. Well, we just don't know,
and I suspected this might be the case, but we just
don't know enough biology at the present time to
take that all the way through to 21 days. This is
what I'd like to do, would be to take it all the way
through to 21 days. Then we could check it for
injections, the effects of different additives,
feed additives, whether they were toxic or
non-toxic, etc. Just many, many uses could be made
of this. About all the value it was, or is at this
time to us, or proved to be, we've discontinued any
interest in it right this minute, but the
youngsters all over the country used this plastic
eggshell. as a science project in their
school work. And they put these embryos in there
and they can watch the blood island form on the
germinal disc Then they can watch the blood
vessels form. Then they can watch the heart form,
and they can see the heart beating and pumping.
They see it's completely clear, and they can watch
the heart pumping the blood out the arteries and
back through the veins and so on. So it's been used.
I've shipped those things all over the world, as a
matter of fact, but particularly over the United
States. I had one extension told him in Ohio that
every year he would order a couple hundred of those
shells, if I had that many, he'd order them every
year to distribute to the kids in Ohio for their
science, those that were interested in eggs as a
science project. And so we've discontinued
because we've gone just about as far as we can on
this. We're just going to have to learn more
biology before we can take them all the way
through. But there's some hope that you might be
able to do that someday. Oh, I don't think in a doubt
that we'll be able to do it someday. I won't, but I
won't live that long, but somebody will. Yes,
indeed.
Then we... We did some work on clay feeding,
bentonite and clay work, and we have gotten some
definite responses from feeding of clay to these
laying hens. There's also been some reports since
our first paper, there's been some reports from
other areas for feeding it to broilers. How they
get any additional response from the feed because
it includes a little clay, I do not know. And I will
never have time to really determine one of the
suspicions I have as to why. I have a feeling that
probably these clays are extremely fine
particles, most of the clays. And I have a feeling
that the nutrients coat these clay particles and
that gives a greater surface exposure to the villi
on the lining of the digestive tract so that the
absorption rate is perhaps higher. I don't know
that this is it, but I'd like to be able to test it.
And I got far enough to get a company that said they
would make me clays of different glands. granular
sizes so I could do it. I may get back to it in my
retirement days and further test it, but that's as
far as we've gone on that. And then there's two
other areas that I'd definitely like to mention
that I think we've made some fairly original
contributions. One is that quite a number of years
ago, we fed to these laying hens, we fed... eggs. We
simply took the feed and then put in the equivalent
of one egg per man per day. Two eggs, three eggs,
four eggs, seven eggs, and ten eggs per man per day.
And fed these hens for a full year. on this to
determine about this cholesterol thing that we
hear so much about, particularly in the medical
profession. Well, we actually found that the
higher the level of eggs we included, the better
the performance of the birds and the lower the
mortality.
I don't think there's any doubt that this is
significant.
And then the... Can
we step back to that a minute? You say one egg per man
per day. Now, do you mean per chicken? Yeah. In
other words, that hen consumed in her diet, she
consumed the amount of egg that a man would
consume...
in a day. I wanted to feed these hens at different
levels of consumption, of egg consumption. So I
fed them on equivalent to a man basis, you see. In
other words, this group of hens got no eggs added.
This one got the equivalent eggs added,
equivalent to a man, an average man and woman, and
the average size, consuming one egg per man per
day. And then two and so on, up to ten eggs per man,
equivalent of a man would be eating ten eggs if he
had got as much eggs as his hen was getting, don't
you see? So you would adjust for the body weight of
the chicken. A chicken of a certain size would get a
certain portion of an egg. Yes, yeah. And in other
words, the ratio was here so we could check to see
what effect these eggs had, the cholesterol in the
eggs. There were whole eggs given to these birds.
And
we also did some work and were asked to report it at
several seminars on the relation of calcium
source and the particle size of the calcium, its
relation to eggshell quality. You see, the
feeding of oyster shell, for example,
supplementary shell, would it do any good in terms
of improving shell quality? And so we did, there
were about three years' work in this area. I think
this made a real contribution.
Oh, we have also did quite an extensive amount of
work feeding of dwarf or many layers, the dwarf
birds versus normal birds. And we have showed that
to get optimum performance from the dwarf birds,
you have to feed a higher density diet. Their
capacity is lower, and thus you have to increase
the concentration of the nutrients in the diet
that they get. And we were early in doing that.